Product Thinking blog post (#686)
cncf/tag-app-delivery: website/content/en/blog/product-thinking-for-platforms.md

---
title:  "Product Thinking for Platforms"
slug: product-thinking-for-platforms
date:   2024-06-13 01:00:00 +0000
author: Dominik Kress, Michael Luskind, David Stenglein
categories:
tags:
- WG Platforms
---

# Product Thinking for Platforms

## Introduction

Are you building platforms your engineers love to use?

KubeCon EU 2024 just wrapped up and while the buzz around AI was omnipresent, there was another topic the cloud native community couldn’t seem to get enough of: Platform engineering. It doesn’t matter if you attended the very first CoLocated [Platform Engineering Day](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/co-located-events/platform-engineering-day/#about), listened in on the [Platform Engineering Talks Track](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/program/schedule/), strolled through the sponsored booth hall or just sat at home checking your Social Media Thread with FOMO.

> If we're talking about platform engineering, we of course need to bring up the [CNCF Platform Engineering Maturity Model](https://tag-app-delivery.cncf.io/wgs/platforms/maturity-model/v1/) that helps organizations evaluate the current state of their platform, understand the gaps, and inform the strategy for the future of their platform.One such direction that many high performing organizations share is treating your platform as a product. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we're talking about platform engineering, we of course need to bring up the [CNCF Platform Engineering Maturity Model](https://tag-app-delivery.cncf.io/wgs/platforms/maturity-model/v1/) that helps organizations evaluate the current state of their platform, understand the gaps, and inform the strategy for the future of their platform. One such direction that many high performing organizations share is treating your platform as a product. 
```

Author: Got that space.

## What is product thinking?

Product thinking is the process of identifying and prioritizing the problems your customers face and creating value by solving them.

Notice that didn't include solutions or features.

### Solving Problems vs Creating Solutions

In order to have a successful product knowing **why** you are building something is just as important as **what** you build. After all, if you don't know why you are building something, how do you know you are building the right thing? Successful product teams understand this and focus their efforts on understanding user pain points before jumping in with solutions. 

It is all too natural for engineers to jump into solutioning, but this approach has downsides. By jumping straight to solutioning, you cut off exploration of the problem, which could have a larger scope than you realize. The solution you create might not fit user needs and you've just wasted time and money building the wrong thing. Not only have you wasted your own time, but your users still struggle with the same underlying problem. Perhaps they even experience additional pain by being forced to adopt your ill-fitting solution.

> Product thinking helps you become proactive in learning about your users' problems and unearthing new opportunities to improve their experience. It gives you the ability to de-risk your effort by fully understanding the underlying problems and validating your assumptions about your potential solutions before you build.

Reviewer: Here we have `Product thinking`. Some point later there is `product thinking` and most often we have `Product Thinking`. I think we should align on one way on how to caps that and I would say CamelCase with `Product Thinking` everywhere would be nicest because it's a name and all

Author: I've capitalized everywhere.

This mindset shift from project to product is essential for creating successful platforms.

## How does Product Thinking fit with platforms?

Modern platforms and platform engineering are focused on reducing cognitive load for engineers and allowing them to focus on creating business value. It only makes sense to treat the platform as a product that becomes part of the value chain of the business. 

Platforms are for building things and running them. A platform user needs to be able to do both.

### Find the platform user and value

If we accept this premise (and we'll get into why you would want to below) then we need to figure out how to create value for our users. As we mentioned above, our users are creating value for the business and anything we can do to aid in that process will be of value to them.

> This is where the rubber hits the road with product thinking and platform engineering. 

Reviewer: hmm okay if we take Product Thinking as a name and have it camel case everywhere then maybe platform engineering as well? Or is this now a good reason to stick with lower case? :D Anyways: one Style would be great.

Author: platform engineering seems to be lower case in the examples I find on Gartner or platformengineering.org

> You have two choices when you build platforms for people to use: you can be focused on their problems or your own. This might seem counter-intuitive. Of course when you build a platform it is for other people to use, right? Well, maybe. In the infrastructure world, we frequently build platforms for ourselves to deal with inbound requests from our users. The approach to automation is a good example. Much traditional automation is focused on dealing with either BAU infrastructure work or automating our response to inbound user requests. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have two choices when you build platforms for people to use: you can be focused on their problems or your own. This might seem counter-intuitive. Of course when you build a platform it is for other people to use, right? Well, maybe. In the infrastructure world, we frequently build platforms for ourselves to deal with inbound requests from our users. The approach to automation is a good example. Much traditional automation is focused on dealing with either business-as-usual infrastructure work or automating our response to inbound user requests. 
```

Didn't really know the BAU word yet :)

Author: Replaced with day to day.
